# Project Philosophy

> `.arc` frees your architecture from infra and vendor cruft so you can focus on the real business logic of your app. Ship only the code that matters, iterate faster and enjoy unprecedented availability guarantees.

The iron age of compute began with racked physical servers. Early cloud compute evolved past physical servers into virtual machines.

Virtual machines eventually gave way to containers and quickly containers have given rise to *cloud functions*.

Each cycle has taught new lessons in software architecture and this most recent iteration brings new challenges. 

- Config and tooling is designed for the last generation of metaphors 
- AWS is massive and overwhelming with many similar &mdash; but not the same &mdash; products with divergent interfaces between interlocking services
- Deep proprietary knowledge is required to configure and maintain common infrastructure primitives
- Configuration and infrastructure can drift, leaving systems in states that are difficult to repeat / reproduce, and thus scale
- Painful manifest files; JSON is difficult to read, has no comments, and is unforgiving to edit; YAML isn't much better and is in some ways far worse (i.e. deeply nested statements)

_Some_ of these problems have been tamed with [infrastructure as code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure_as_Code), creating repeatable and reproducible systems. The trade-off there is: you're committing AWS configuration knowledge into your revision control systems.

**`.arc` views infrastructure as a build artifact.** And we prefer to not check build artifacts in with our code.

## The .arc file

`architect` defines a high level vendor agnostic plaintext format, `.arc`, as a manifest file to solve the specific problems laid out above.

With `.arc` you:

- Focus on defining your app architecture with a subset of service primitives as high level definitions
- Generate local code, configure, provision, and deploy cloud infrastructure from the `.arc` manifest
- You can still safely use the console tactically to access and administer primitives defined in `.arc` and generated by CloudFormation
- The format, parser, and tooling are completely open to extension

> In theory, `.arc` is also entirely portable between cloud vendors. (However no ports to clouds other than AWS have been made as of today.)

## The .arc format

The `.arc` format follows a few simple rules:

- Comments start with `#`
- Sections start with `@`
- **Everything between sections becomes instructions for generating AWS infrastructure**

`.arc` files are made up of the following sections:

- [`@app`](/reference/app) [*required*] defines your application namespace
- [`@aws`](/reference/aws) defines AWS variables
- [`@events`](/reference/events) defines application events you can publish and subscribe to
- [`@http`](/reference/http) defines HTTP (i.e. `text/html`) handlers
- [`@indexes`](/reference/indexes) defines table global secondary indexes 
- [`@scheduled`](/reference/scheduled) defines functions that run on a schedule
- [`@static`](/reference/static) defines S3 buckets for static assets
- [`@tables`](/reference/tables) defines DynamoDB database tables and trigger functions for them 
- [`@ws`](/reference/ws) defines Web Socket handlers 

This is a complete `.arc` file example:

```arc
# .arc
@app
hello

@aws
bucket cloudformation-bucket

@static
fingerprint true

@ws
@http
get /
post /likes
get /likes

@events
hit-counter

@scheduled
daily-affirmation rate(1 day)

@tables
likes
  likeID *String
  stream true

@indexes
likes
  date *String
```

Running `arc init` in the same directory as the `.arc` file above generates the following function code:

```bash
/
|-src
| |-http
| | |-get-index/
| | |-get-likes/
| | '-post-likes/
| |-events
| | '-hit-counter/
| |-scheduled
| | '-daily-affirmation/
| |-tables
| | '-likes/
| '-ws
|   |-ws-connect/
|   |-ws-default/
|   '-ws-disconnect/
'-.arc
```

The `.arc` format is terse, easy to read, and quickly learnable to author. The expressions in a `.arc` file unlock the formerly complex tasks of cloud infrastructure provisioning, deployment, and orchestration.

---

## Next: [Check out the quickstart](/quickstart)

